---
layout: post
title: Analysis of Airfoil Efficiency in Compressible and Incompressible Conditions
description:  Using ANSYS Fluent, a study between a wedge airfoil and a typical NACA 0012 airfoil was conducted. This analysis consists of evaluating the efficiency of each airfoil in compressible flow conditions.
skills: 
- Compressible Fluid Dynamics
- CFD
- ANSYS Fluent
- Analysis
main-image: /multisim_cfd_case_study.png 
---

---
## Project Introduction
This project attempts to explore the relationship between airfoil geometry and compressible flow conditions. Two different type of airfoils are selected for analysis: the first is a wedge airfoil optimized for compressible flow conditions and the second is a typical NACA 0012 seen in low airspeed conditions.
## Boundary Conditions, Mesh Convergence, and Geometric Convergence
In order to get accurate results, boundary conditions must first be set. These boundary conditions must also be adjusted until a convergence check is reached.
{% include image-gallery.html images="sim_geometry.png" height="400"%}
<span style="font-size: 15px">Simulation Geometry (D- Front Wall, E- Back Wall, F- Top&Bottom Wall)</span>
<br>
The front wall boundary is set as an inlet while the back wall boundary is set as an outlet. A pressure far-field boundary condition is used to most accuratly simulation compressible flow conditions. This assumption is required as it will accuratly simulate high-speed conditions as if there were no obstructions near the airfoil. This is in direct contrast to the typical ***No Slip*** boundary conditions used when simulating incompressible flow.
{% include image-gallery.html images="fgeometry_convergence.png" height="400"%}
<span style="font-size: 15px">Convergence Data for Front Wall Geometry</span>
{% include image-gallery.html images="bgeometry_convergence.png" height="400"%}
<span style="font-size: 15px">Convergence Data for Back Wall Geometry</span>
{% include image-gallery.html images="tbgeometry_convergence.png" height="400"%}
<span style="font-size: 15px">Convergence Data for Top and Bottom Wall Geometry</span>
{% include image-gallery.html images="mesh_setup.png" height="400"%}
<span style="font-size: 15px">Designed Mesh</span>
{% include image-gallery.html images="mesh_closeup.png" height="400"%}
<span style="font-size: 15px">Close-up View of Mesh Surrounding Airfoil</span>
{% include image-gallery.html images="vertmesh_convergence.png" height="400"%}
<span style="font-size: 15px">Convergence Data for Vertical Mesh</span>
{% include image-gallery.html images="horimesh_convergence.png" height="400"%}
<span style="font-size: 15px">Convergence Data for Horizontal Mesh</span>
{% include image-gallery.html images="foilmesh_convergence.png" height="400"%}
<span style="font-size: 15px">Convergence Data for Airfoil Mesh</span>
{% include image-gallery.html images="solver_convergence.png" height="400"%}
<span style="font-size: 15px">Solver Convergence Data</span>
### Solver Conditions and Fluid Properties
In order to get an accurate simulation for compressible flow conditions, the correct solver conditions must be applied. For compressible flow, the energy equation must be taken into consideration due to the properties of air at high speeds. In order to properly simulate turbulance, the model ***SST k-omega*** was selected. Among the other choices, SST k-omega was found to be the most consistant. Finally, the fluid properties for air were selected using the Sutherland model and Ideal Gas model as fluid viscosity and density change greatly as airspeed increases
## Simulation Results
{% include image-gallery.html images="dwstatic_pressure.png" height="400"%}
<span style="font-size: 15px">Static Pressure Contour for the Double Wedge (Mach>1)</span>
{% include image-gallery.html images="NACAstatic_pressure.png" height="400"%}
<span style="font-size: 15px"> Static Pressure Contour for the NACA 0012 (Mach>1)</span>
<br>
The static pressure contour generated by the double wedge airfoil showcases clean regions of low and high pressure. These regions will provide a substantial amount of lift. However, in the case of the NACA, the normal shock produced at the leading edge instead interferes with the pressure field resulting in low efficieny.
{% include image-gallery.html images="LD_wedge.png" height="400"%}
<span style="font-size: 15px"> Lift to Drag ratio for Double Wedge</span>
{% include image-gallery.html images="LD_NACA.png" height="400"%}
<span style="font-size: 15px"> A Much Smaller Result for Lift to Drag Ratio for NACA 0012</span>
